# Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Datasets

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
data/song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
data/song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

If you would like to look at the JSON data within log_data files, you will need to create a pandas dataframe to read the data. Remember to first import JSON and pandas libraries.
```
df = pd.read_json(filepath, lines=True)
```

For example, ```df = pd.read_json('data/log_data/2018/11/2018-11-01-events.json', lines=True)``` would read the data file ```2018-11-01-events.json```.

## Data Modeling

### Facts

**f_songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page ```NextSong```

_songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent_

### Dimensions

**d_users** - users in the app

_user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level_

**d_songs** - songs in music database

_song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration_

**d_artists** - artists in music database

_artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude_

**d_time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

_start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday_

## Postgres Service
```
docker-compose build
docker-compose up
```

## Scripts
1 - Run create tables script:
```
python3 ./create_tables.py
```
- Drops (if exists) and Creates the sparkify database.
- Establishes connection with the sparkify database and gets cursor to it.
- Drops all the tables.
- Creates all tables needed.
- Finally, closes the connection. 

2 - Run etl script:
```
python3 ./etl.py
```
